A universe needs to be created for Travellers to explore
and find adventure. Many referees use published
universes to save themselves a great deal of time, such
as Charted Space or 2300AD.
However, some referees will prefer to create their own
universes. This chapter will show you how.
SECTORS AND SUBSECTORS
A universe is mapped in convenient segments, called
subsectors. Each subsector is an area of hexagonal
cells measuring eight hexes by 10 hexes. Since the
recommended scale is one parsec (equal to 3.26
light years) per hex, the subsector covers an area 10
parsecs by eight parsecs.
Sixteen subsectors (arranged in four rows of four
subsectors each) form a sector, about the largest size
practical for a continuing Traveller campaign.
Mapping subsectors consists of two sequences: star
mapping and world design. Star mapping examines
each hexagon in the subsector grid and determines
if there is a star system present. It also determines
the presence or absence of starports, bases and fuel
for starships. All of this information is coded onto the
subsector hexes and serves as a guide to the referee
and Travellers during interstellar travel. World design
examines the single most important world in each
system and determines basic characteristics for it. This
information is retained for use during adventures on the
world’s surface.
Note that not all universes will require the creation of a
subsector or sector. Indeed, entire campaigns can be
set in just one star system or on a single world, or even
within a single city.
STAR MAPPING
In order to create a subsector, the referee uses
a blank subsector map and dice to determine the
presence of systems, starports and bases. Reading
World Profiles on page 248 shows the coding and
placement of information about worlds within a
subsector. This format should be used to allow
Travellers and referees to note information that
would normally be available to them. The referee
may elect to omit some information and only allow it
to be inserted after the Travellers have determined it
for themselves.
World Occurrence: There is a basic one-half chance
that one world (and its attendant stellar system) will be
in a hex on a subsector or sector map. Systematically
check each hex, throwing 1D and marking the hex with
a circle if the result is a 4, 5 or 6. This indicates that a
world of note or interest is present; otherwise, leave the
hex blank.
The referee may elect to alter the normal chances of
worlds, making them more frequent or less frequent
to correspond to specific regions of the galaxy. A 50%
density (no DM) is appropriate for the most areas. Apply
DM-2 for rift (all but empty) sectors, DM-1 for sparse
sectors and DM+1 for densely populated sectors.
Starport Type: Many worlds have starports, their
presence being essential to interstellar trade and
commerce. See Starports, page 257.
Bases: Stellar systems may have bases for military
forces, the navy, the scouts or other arms of interstellar
government. See Bases, page 259.
Bases will also help determine political boundaries in
the sector. An interstellar government will place bases
along its borders to guard against aggression from
rival states or to control local systems. The presence
of multiple bases within a few parsecs might indicate a
contested border or a mighty stronghold.
Gas Giants: A star system may have one or more gas
giant planets (similar to Jupiter or Saturn). The presence
of a gas giant allows streamlined starships to refuel by
skimming; this eliminates fuel cost for the vessel and
increases profit. It also allows refuelling at systems that
do not have starports. Refuelling in this fashion requires
1D days to travel to the gas giant and commence
refuelling. Fuel gained by skimming is unrefined.
Gas giants are relatively common. Roll 10+ for a gas giant
not to be present in the system. If one is present, mark the
system hex in accordance with the world format.

GALACTIC DIRECTIONS
North, south, east and west are insufficient
terms for referring to directions within the galaxy.
Instead, the following conventions have achieved
widespread acceptance when referring to direction:
Coreward – toward the galactic core; Rimward –
toward the rim of the galaxy; Spinward – towards
the direction the galaxy is rotating (or spinning);
Trailing – opposite the spin of the galaxy.

System Name: Each system is generally named for the
primary world within. This name should be decided upon
by the referee and placed in the hex for identification.
Travel Zones: Most worlds are assumed to be civilised
or at least amenable to Travellers and visitors. Some,
however, are caught in the throes of war, plagued by
disease or simply not ready for interstellar visitors.
Such worlds are classified by Travel Zones to denote
such status. In most cases, the referee should indicate
Travel Zones based on the information available. Two
such zone types exist; Amber and Red.
Amber Zones indicate that Travellers should exercise
caution when visiting such worlds. The Amber
code may mean that the citizens of the world are
xenophobic, that the political situation is chaotic or that
some other danger exists within the system.

System Name: Each system is generally named for the
primary world within. This name should be decided upon
by the referee and placed in the hex for identification.
Travel Zones: Most worlds are assumed to be civilised
or at least amenable to Travellers and visitors. Some,
however, are caught in the throes of war, plagued by
disease or simply not ready for interstellar visitors.
Such worlds are classified by Travel Zones to denote
such status. In most cases, the referee should indicate
Travel Zones based on the information available. Two
such zone types exist; Amber and Red.
Amber Zones indicate that Travellers should exercise
caution when visiting such worlds. The Amber
code may mean that the citizens of the world are
xenophobic, that the political situation is chaotic or that
some other danger exists within the system.

Communications routes should be carefully drawn
so as to avoid making all parts of the subsector
accessible; a subsector should have some areas
as backwaters for exploration and adventure.
Communications routes are drawn as single lines
connecting hexes on the subsector grid.
Trade Routes: Trade routes link worlds that have
strong commercial ties. Consult the Trade Routes table
– if any pair of worlds matching the two columns are
within four parsecs of each other and there is a jump-1
or jump-2 route between them, then mark a trade route
connecting those two worlds.
Trade Routes
First World Second World
Industrial
High Tech

Asteroid
Desert
Ice-Capped
Non-Industrial

High Population
Rich

Agricultural
Garden
Waterworld
The subsector or sector map, once generated, shows
the distribution of star systems in space and their
relationships to each other in terms of relative distance
and commercial space-lane connections.

READING WORLD PROFILES
Traveller describes planets using a single line
of hexadecimal code. Hexadecimal codes
use base 16 notation; digits 0 through 9 are
represented by common numbers; digits 10 to 15
are represented by letters A through F. A is equal
to 10, B equal to 11 and so on – the highest
digit will F, equal to 15. In some unusual cases,
further sequences of letters can also be used,
such as using G as a digit to describe TL16.
Once you get used to this method of laying out
the characteristics of a planet, it becomes easy to
decipher during play. This is an example world:
Cogri 0101 CA6A643-9 N Ri Wa A
The first component is the name : Cogri
The second component (the four digit number) is
 its hex location on a sector map. : 0101
The next string of digits denote, in order:
• Starport quality : C
• Size : A
• Atmosphere type : 6
• Hydrographic percentage : A
• Population : 6
• Government type : 4
• Law Level : 3
• Tech Level : 9
The next component marks any bases present
on the world – examples include N for Naval
Base and S for Scout Base. : N
This is followed by any Trade codes for the
planet. Cogri is a rich waterworld : RI WA
The Travel Zone for the system is last; A = Amber
Zone, R = Red Zone. If no code is given then the
world is either unclassified or a Green Zone : A

WORLD CREATION
The term world refers to the various bodies contained
in a stellar system; it encompasses planets, satellites
and asteroid belts. For example, the single most
important world in a system may not be a planet at all
but a satellite of a gas giant or maybe a planetoid within
an asteroid belt.
The worlds contained in star systems on the subsector
map may be further classified in terms of their gross
physical characteristics and their effects on persons
living on them or travelling to them. These codes
indicate specific facts about a world through the use of
a numeric code.
This world creation process applies only to the single
most important and most travelled world in a star
system; additional planets in a system can be created
by the referee as necessary.
The basic planetary codes are Size, Atmosphere,
Hydrographics, Population, Government, Law Level,
Technology Level, Starport and Bases, and are
generated using 2D each, with DMs applied based
upon the results of other codes. These codes establish
the basic identity of a world, as shown in Reading
World Profiles. Additional information can be created
and should be, to more fully describe a world.
When creating worlds, a subsector table containing
world name, location, profiles and other basic data
should be compiled. This should be available to
Travellers who journey through the subsector and
is assumed to be routinely available information. In
addition, the referee should create other information
that may be pertinent. This may include details of
other planets in the star system, radiation emissions
from the star, types of terrain present on the planetary
surface, unique encounter tables, data on flora
and fauna, industrial or agricultural capacity, social
structure and government, and possibly actual maps
of the planetary surface.
Creating an entire universe is a fun process and can be
as detailed as you like!

CHARTED SPACE: ROUTES AND JUMPS
In the Charted Space universe, communication
and trade routes are classified by the type of jump
drive necessary to travel them. This is simply
because of refuelling issues – few starships carry
enough fuel to make multiple jumps in succession,
so they must make sure to jump only to systems
where they can refuel; either to a starport or a
system with a gas giant or water-bearing worlds
where unrefined fuel can be skimmed.
A jump-1 route has a starport or gas giant in every
hex, a jump-2 route has at least one one-hex ‘gap’
between refuelling points (either an empty hex
or one without a starport or gas giant), while a
jump-3 route has at least one two-hex gap and so
on. In this way, a ship’s captain will know that any
route classified at less than or equal to their ship’s
jump capability can be travelled with no risk of
becoming stranded in deep space.

SIZE
The Size code for worlds ranges from 0 to 10 and is
determined by rolling 2D-2. Size measures a world’s
diameter in thousands of kilometres and the bigger
a planet, the higher its gravity. The values for gravity
in the Size table assume that the world has a density
similar to that of Earth. Worlds like gas giants have
a lower gravity than their size would indicate, while
extremely dense worlds would have a higher gravity.
Intelligent species (sophonts) are unlikely to evolve
naturally on worlds smaller than Size 4 or 5. Larger
planets tend to imply larger populations, as there is
more room for expansion.

Size
Size Diameter Example

Surface
Gravity (Gs)

0 Less than
1,000km

Asteroid,
orbital
complex

Negligible

1 1,600km Triton 0.05
2 3,200km Luna,
Europa

0.15

3 4,800km Mercury,
Ganymede

0.25
4 6,400km Mars 0.35
5 8,000km 0.45
6 9,600km 0.7
7 11,200km 0.9
8 12,800km Earth 1.0
9 14,400km 1.25
10 (A) 16,000km 1.4
Worlds of Size 1 or less are asteroids, planetoids,
orbital complexes, space stations and other small
satellites, and much too small to retain a breathable
atmosphere. They are uninhabitable by most forms of
life without technological support.

Atmosphere
Atmosphere Composition Examples Pressure Survival Gear Required
0 None Moon 0.00 Vacc Suit
1 Trace Mars 0.001 to 0.09 Vacc Suit
2 Very Thin, Tainted 0.1 to 0.42 Respirator, Filter
3 Very Thin 0.1 to 0.42 Respirator
4 Thin, Tainted 0.43 to 0.7 Filter
5 Thin 0.43 to 0.7
6 Standard Earth 0.71-1.49
7 Standard, Tainted 0.71-1.49 Filter
8 Dense 1.5 to 2.49
9 Dense, tainted 1.5 to 2.49 Filter
10 (A) Exotic Varies Air Supply
11 (B) Corrosive Venus Varies Vacc Suit
12 (C) Insidious Varies Vacc Suit
13 (D) Very Dense 2.5+
14 (E) Low 0.5 or less
15 (F) Unusual Varies Varies



HIGH & LOW GRAVITY WORLDS
Worlds where the gravity is 0.7G or less (Size 6
or less) are low gravity worlds. Common features
include improbable-looking rock formations, thin
and spindly life forms and flying as a common form
of locomotion (assuming the atmosphere is thick
enough to support flyers). The effect on Travellers is
detailed on page 80.
High-gravity worlds have a gravity of 1.4G or more.
They tend to be extremely dense worlds; common
features include wide rocky plains, squat, muscular
creatures and plant life that spreads out like lichen
instead of growing up. Crawling, burrowing or
swimming are the most common forms of locomotion.
The effect on Travellers is detailed on page 80.
ATMOSPHERE
The Atmosphere code measures the type of
atmosphere present. A planet’s Atmosphere is
generated by rolling 2D-7 and adding the planet’s Size.
Consult the Atmosphere table for specifics.
ATMOSPHERE TYPES
Tainted: Tainted atmospheres contain some element
harmful to humans, such as an unusually high
proportion of carbon dioxide. A Traveller who breathes
a tainted atmosphere without a filter will suffer 1D
damage every few minutes (or potentially hours,
depending on the level of taint), in addition to any
other effects.

Exotic: An exotic atmosphere is unbreathable by
humans but not otherwise hazardous. A Traveller
needs an air supply to breath in an exotic atmosphere
without suffocating.
Corrosive: Corrosive atmospheres are highly
dangerous. A Traveller who breathes in a corrosive
atmosphere will suffer 1D damage each round.
Insidious: An insidious atmosphere is like a corrosive
one but is so potent that it attacks equipment as well.
The chief danger in an insidious atmosphere is that
the toxic gases will destroy the seals and filters on the
Traveller’s protective gear. An insidious atmosphere
worms its way past protection after 2D hours on
average, although vigilant maintenance or advanced
protective gear can prolong survival times.
Very Dense: These worlds have thick N2/O2
atmospheres but their mean surface pressure is too
high to support unprotected human life (high pressure
nitrogen and oxygen are deadly to humans). However,
pressure naturally decreases with increasing altitude, so
if there are highlands at the right altitude the pressure
may drop enough to support human life. Alternatively,
there may not be any topography high enough for
humans to inhabit, necessitating floating gravitic or
dirigible habitats or sealed habitats on the surface.
Low: The opposite of a Very Dense atmosphere, these
massive worlds have thin N2/O2 atmospheres that
settle in the lowlands and depressions and are only
breathable there – the pressure drops off so rapidly
with altitude that the highest topographic points of the
surface may be close to vacuum.
Unusual: An Unusual atmosphere is a catchall term
for an atmosphere that behaves in a strange manner.
Examples include ellipsoidal atmospheres, which are
thin at the poles and dense at the equator; Panthalassic
worlds composed of a rocky core surrounded by
a water layer hundreds of kilometres thick; worlds
wracked by storms so intense that local air pressure
changes from dense to thin depending on the current
weather and other planets with unusual and hazardous
atmospheric conditions.

WORLD TEMPERATURE
A planet’s surface temperature is primarily
dependent on its distance from its primary
star (how much solar radiation it receives)
and how thick its atmosphere is (how much of
this heat it can retain). The habitable zone is
the area around a star most conducive to the
development of Earth-like, habitable worlds and
it is assumed that most colonised worlds will be
in this habitable zone. Roll 2D for the planet’s
temperature, applying the DMs listed below for
the Temperature table:
Atmosphere 0 or 1: No modifiers, but
temperature swings from roasting during the day
to frozen at night.
Atmosphere 2 or 3: DM-2
Atmosphere 4, 5 or E:  DM-1
Atmosphere 6 or 7: DM+0
Atmosphere 8 or 9: DM+1
Atmosphere A, D or F: DM+2
Atmosphere B or C: DM+6
Optionally, the referee may also choose to
impose one of the following:
Hot edge of Habitable Zone: DM+4
Cold edge of Habitable Zone: DM-4
Temperature
2D Type

Average
Temperature Description

2 or
less

Frozen -51º or
less

Frozen world. No
liquid water, very
dry atmosphere.
3–4 Cold -51º to 0º Icy world. Little
liquid water,
extensive ice caps,
few clouds.
5–9 Temperate 0º to 30º Temperate world.
Earth-like. Liquid
& vaporised water
are common,
moderate ice caps.
10–
11

Hot 31º to 80º Hot world. Small or
no ice caps, little
liquid water. Most
water in the form of
clouds.

12 or
more

Boiling 81º+ Boiling world. No
ice caps, little liquid
water.

HYDROGRAPHICS
The Hydrographic code measures the amount of
surface liquid and hence the amount of dry land on the
world. Hydrographic percentage goes from 0 to 10,
measuring the surface liquid in increments of 10%. For
normal worlds, this will be water; on other worlds with
corrosive or exotic atmospheres, it could be a corrosive
or exotic liquid like ammonia or methane.
Hydrographic code is obtained by rolling 2D-7 and
adding the planet’s Atmosphere. Some Atmospheres
use the modifier below:
Size 0 or 1: Hydrographic 0
Atmosphere 0, 1, A-F: DM-4
If the planet’s Atmosphere is not D or Panthalassic F (and
thick enough to retain water under extreme circumstances),
then you can also apply DMs for temperature:
Hot Temperature: DM-2
Boiling Temperature: DM-6
Hydrographics
Hydrographics

Hydrographic
Percentage Description
0 0%–5% Desert world
1 6%–15% Dry world
2 16%–25% A few small seas
3 26%–35% Small seas and
oceans
4 36%–45% Wet world
5 46%–55% A large ocean
6 56%–65% Large oceans
7 66%–75% Earth-like world
8 76%–85% Only a few islands
and archipelagos
9 86%–95% Almost entirely water
10 (A) 96%–100% Waterworld

Population
Population Inhabitants Range Description
0 None 0 —
1 Few 1+ A tiny farmstead or a single family
2 Hundreds 100+ A village
3 Thousands 1,000+ —
4 Tens of thousands 10,000+ Small town
5 Hundreds of thousands 100,000+ Average city
6 Millions 1,000,000+ —
7 Tens of millions 10,000,000+ Large city
8 Hundreds of millions 100,000,000+ —
9 Billions 1,000,000,000+ Present day Earth
10 (A) Tens of billions 10,000,000,000+ —
11 (B) Hundreds of billions 100,000,000,000+ Incredibly crowded world
12 (C) Trillions 1,000,000,000,000+ World-city

POPULATION
The Population code measures the planet’s intelligent
population. The Population code can be generalised as
the number of zeroes following a one, so Population 6
indicates a population in the millions (1,000,000).
Population is generated with 2D–2. However, the
referee may like to introduce extremely high population
worlds (Population B or C) at their discretion.

LOW-POPULATION WORLDS
Planets with Population 3 or less are very small colonies
and may differ considerably from the descriptions in
the rest of this chapter. A world with Population 1 can
change its Government code with an argument over
dinner and is unlikely to bother with a worldwide network
of communications satellites even at TL15.
If a world has Population 0, it is uninhabited and so has
a Government, Law Level and Technology Level of 0.
GOVERNMENT
The Government code indicates a range of possible
ruling systems, determined by rolling 2D–7 and adding
the planet’s Population code.
The Common Contraband column on the Government
table determines goods such a government is likely to
restrict but should not be taken as a universal rule.

 Government
 Government Government Type Description Examples

 Example
 Contraband

 0 None No government structure. In many cases,
 family bonds predominate.

 Family, clan, anarchy None

 1 Company/
 Corporation

 Ruling functions are assumed by a company
 managerial elite and most citizenry are
 company employees or dependants.

 Corporate outpost,
 asteroid mine, feudal
 domain

 Weapons, Drugs,
 Travellers

 2 Participating
 Democracy

 Ruling functions are reached by the advice
 and consent of the citizenry directly.

 Collective, tribal council,
 comm-linked consensus

 Drugs

 3 Self-Perpetuating
 Oligarchy

 Ruling functions are performed by a
 restricted minority, with little or no input
 from the mass of citizenry.

 Plutocracy, hereditary
 ruling caste

 Technology,
 Weapons,
 Travellers

 4 Representative
 Democracy

 Ruling functions are performed by
 elected representatives.

 Republic, democracy Drugs, Weapons,
 Psionics

 5 Feudal
 Technocracy

 Ruling functions are performed by specific
 individuals for persons who agree to be
 ruled by them. Relationships are based on
 the performance of technical activities that
 are mutually beneficial.

 Those with access to
 advanced technology
 tend to have higher
 social status

 Technology,
 Weapons,
 Computers

 6 Captive
 Government

 Ruling functions are performed by an
 imposed leadership answerable to an
 outside group.

 A colony or conquered
 area

 Weapons,
 Technology,
 Travellers

 7 Balkanisation No central authority exists; rival
 governments complete for control. Law
 level refers to the government nearest
 the starport.

 Multiple governments,
 civil war

 Varies

 8 Civil Service
 Bureaucracy

 Ruling functions are performed by
 government agencies employing
 individuals selected for their expertise.

 Technocracy,
 Communism

 Drugs, Weapons

 9 Impersonal
 Bureaucracy

 Ruling functions are performed by
 agencies that have become insulated from
 the governed citizens.

 Entrenched castes of
 bureaucrats, decaying
 empire

 Technology,
 Weapons, Drugs,
 Travellers,
 Psionics

 10 (A) Charismatic
 Dictator

 Ruling functions are performed by
 agencies directed by a single leader who
 enjoys the overwhelming confidence of
 the citizens.

 Revolutionary leader,
 messiah, emperor

 None

 11 (B) Non-Charismatic
 Leader

 A previous charismatic dictator has been
 replaced by a leader through normal
 channels.

 Military dictatorship,
 hereditary kingship

 Weapons,
 Technology,
 Computers

 12 (C) Charismatic
 Oligarchy

 Ruling functions are performed by a select
 group of members of an organisation
 or class that enjoys the overwhelming
 confidence of the citizenry.

 Junta, revolutionary
 council

 Weapons

 13 (D) Religious
 Dictatorship

 Ruling functions are performed by a
 religious organisation without regard to the
 specific individual needs of the citizenry.

 Cult, transcendent
 philosophy, psionic
 group mind

 Varies

 14 (E) Religious
 Autocracy

 Government by a single religious leader
 having absolute power over the citizenry.

 Messiah Varies

 15 (F) Totalitarian
 Oligarchy

 Government by an all-powerful minority
 which maintains absolute control through
 widespread coercion and oppression.

 World church, ruthless
 corporation

 Varies

 RIVALS, FACTIONS, CONNECTIONS & COLONIES
 The Government code determines the dominant
 government type on that planet but there are usually
 other factions such rival political parties, cultural
 groups, religions, rebels and so forth who oppose
 the government. Conflicts on a planet can involve the
 Travellers; they might be hired to smuggle weapons
 to a rebel group or be asked to investigate a political
 scandal involving a government leader.
 Roll D3 to determine how many factions there are on
 the planet, with DM+1 if the Government is 0 or 7,
 and DM-1 if the Government is 10 or more. In cases
 where the faction code is the same as the current
 Government code (or similar, such as two democracies
 or two dictatorships), then it is a splinter faction within
 the ruling government. In cases where it is radically
 different (anarchists against a bureaucracy), then the
 faction is a rebel group or movement.
 For each faction, use the Government table again to
 determine what form it takes. Then roll 2D on the Factions
 table below to determine the strength of each faction.
 On a balkanised world there may be dozens or even
 hundreds of governments but they are generally divided
 into factions with a common ideology or identity.
 Factions
 2D Relative Strength
 2–3 Obscure group – few have heard of them, no
 popular support
 4–5 Fringe group – few supporters
 6–7 Minor group – some supporters
 8–9 Notable group – significant support, well
 known
 10–11 Significant – nearly as powerful as
 government
 12 Overwhelming popular support – more
 powerful than government
 CULTURAL DIFFERENCES
 While colonies trace their heritage back to their mother
 worlds and patron governments and from then onto the
 ancient homeworlds of the species, every world has
 a measure of unique cultural drift. Spacefarers may
 run into bizarre customs or beliefs on different worlds.
 The referee should either decide how a culture has
 developed over the centuries or roll on the Cultural
 Differences table (or better yet, both – a combination
 of reasoned extrapolation and random strangeness
 produces a nicely organic-feeling culture).

 Cultural Differences
 D66 Culture
 11 Sexist – one gender is considered subservient or
 inferior to the other.
 12 Religious – culture is heavily influenced by a
 religion or belief systems, possibly one unique to
 this world.
 13 Artistic – art and culture are highly prized.
 Aesthetic design is important in all artefacts
 produced on world.
 14 Ritualised – social interaction and trade is
 highly formalised. Politeness and adherence to
 traditional forms is considered very important.
 15 Conservative – the culture resists change and
 outside influences.
 16 Xenophobic – the culture distrusts outsiders
 and alien influences. Offworlders will face
 considerable prejudice.
 21 Taboo – a particular topic is forbidden and cannot
 be discussed. Travellers who unwittingly mention
 this topic will be ostracised.
 22 Deceptive – trickery and equivocation are considered
 acceptable. Honesty is a sign of weakness.
 23 Liberal – the culture welcomes change and
 offworld influence. Travellers who bring new and
 strange ideas will be welcomed.
 24 Honourable – one’s word is one’s bond in the
 culture. Lying is both rare and despised.
 25 Influenced – the culture is heavily influenced by
 another, neighbouring world. Roll again for a cultural
 quirk that has been inherited from the culture.
 26 Fusion – the culture is a merger of two distinct
 cultures. Roll again twice to determine the quirks
 inherited from these cultures. If the quirks are
 incompatible, then the culture is likely divided.
 31 Barbaric – physical strength and combat prowess
 are highly valued in the culture. Travellers may
 be challenged to a fight or dismissed if they seem
 incapable of defending themselves. Sports tend
 towards the bloody and violent.
 32 Remnant – the culture is a surviving remnant of a
 once-great and vibrant civilisation, clinging to its
 former glory. The world is filled with crumbling ruins
 and every story revolves around the good old days.
 33 Degenerate – the culture is falling apart and
 is on the brink of war or economic collapse.
 Violent protests are common and the social
 order is decaying.
 34 Progressive – the culture is expanding and
 vibrant. Fortunes are being made in trade; science
 is forging bravely ahead.
 35 Recovering – a recent trauma, such as a plague,
 war, disaster or despotic regime has left scars on
 the culture.

36 Nexus – members of many different cultures and
species visit here.
41 Tourist Attraction – some aspect of the culture or the
planet draws visitors from all over civilised space.
42 Violent – physical conflict is common, taking the
form of duels, brawls or other contests. Trial by
combat is a part of their judicial system.
43 Peaceful – physical conflict is almost unheard-
of. The culture produces few soldiers and
diplomacy reigns supreme. Forceful Travellers
will be ostracised.
44 Obsessed – everyone is obsessed with or
addicted to a substance, personality, act or
item. This monomania pervades every aspect of
the culture.
45 Fashion – fine clothing and decoration are
considered vitally important in the culture.
Underdressed Travellers have no standing here.
46 At war – the culture is at war, either with
another planet or polity, or is troubled by
terrorists or rebels.
51 Unusual Custom: Offworlders – space travellers
hold a unique position in the culture’s mythology
or beliefs and travellers will be expected to live up
to these myths.
52 Unusual Custom: Starport – the planet’s starport
is more than a commercial centre; it might be a
religious temple or be seen as highly controversial
and surrounded by protestors.
53 Unusual Custom: Media – news agencies and
telecommunications channels are especially strange
here. Getting accurate information may be difficult.
54 Unusual Customs: Technology – the culture
interacts with technology in an unusual way.
Telecommunications might be banned, robots
might have civil rights or cyborgs might be property.
55 Unusual Customs: Lifecycle – there might be a
mandatory age of termination or anagathics might
be widely used. Family units might be different,
with children being raised by the state or banned
in favour of cloning.
56 Unusual Customs: Social Standings – the culture
has a distinct caste system. Travellers of a low
social standing who do not behave appropriately
will face punishment.
61 Unusual Customs: Trade – the culture has an odd
attitude towards some aspect of commerce, which
may interfere with trade at the spaceport. For
example, merchants might expect a gift as part
of a deal or some goods may only be handled by
certain families.
62 Unusual Customs: Nobility – those of high social
standing have a strange custom associated with
them; perhaps nobles are blinded, must live in
gilded cages or only serve for a single year before
being exiled.
63 Unusual Customs: Sex – the culture has an
unusual attitude towards intercourse and
reproduction. Perhaps cloning is used instead or
sex is used to seal commercial deals.
64 Unusual Customs: Eating – food and drink
occupies an unusual place in the culture. Perhaps
eating is a private affair or banquets and formal
dinners are seen as the highest form of politeness.
65 Unusual Customs: Travel – Travellers may be
distrusted or feted, or perhaps the culture frowns
on those who leave their homes.
66 Unusual Custom: Conspiracy – something strange
is going on. The government is being subverted
by another group or agency.

LAW LEVEL
The Law Level of a planet represents the relative force
of law extant on the world. A high Law Level indicates
that visitors to the world will have their activities curtailed.
Law Level determines two things in particular – what it
is illegal for Travellers to possess on the world and the
likelihood the Travellers will run afoul of the law.
Law Level is determined by rolling 2D–7 and adding the
Government code.
BANNED GOODS
Different governments ban different goods. A Traveller
might be able to carry their laser rifle slung over their
shoulder on one world and be arrested for carrying a
simple knife on the next planet over. An alien might enjoy
full rights on one world and be treated as an animal on
another. Banned goods are important for smuggling.
As far as Travellers are concerned, the most common
restriction a government imposes is on the possession
of weapons and this is reflected on the Law Level table.
However, the referee might consider the stance of a
government for all of the following:
Weapons: A government that bans weapons begins
with restricting weapons of terror and mass destruction,
then moves onto personal weapons. Governments
will also often ban armour, with a view that an overly
militarised appearance simply attracts trouble.

Drugs: A government that bans drugs begins with
narcotics but at higher Law Levels, medicinal and
anagathic drugs may also be banned.
Information: A government that seeks to control
information begins by restricting the use of computers
and computer programs, especially information-retrieval
and information-control. At higher Law Levels, bringing
data from offworld or even communicating with natives
can be forbidden.
Technology: A government that bans technology
seeks to shield its citizens from the influence of
advanced technology.
Travellers: A ban on Travellers restricts the ability
of outsiders to visit the world, confining them to the
starport or forbidding landing entirely.
Psionics: Restrictions on psionics are common and
most worlds ban psionics as a matter of course. On
other worlds, psionics may be technically legal but
there is such prejudice against it that most psionic
users hide their abilities.

Law Level
Law
Level Weapons Banned Armour
0 No restrictions – heavy armour and a
handy weapon recommended…
1 Poison gas, explosives,
undetectable weapons,
WMD

Battle dress

2 Portable energy and laser
weapons

Combat
armour
3 Military weapons Flak
4 Light assault weapons and
submachine guns

Cloth

5 Personal concealable
weapons

Mesh

6 All firearms except
shotguns & stunners;
carrying weapons
discouraged
7 Shotguns
8 All bladed weapons,
stunners

All visible
armour
9+ All weapons All armour

THE LAW & TRAVELLERS
A planet’s Law Level can be used to determine the
Travellers’ interactions with the law. In each of the
following situations, roll 2D, add the listed modifiers and
if the total is equal to or lower than the planet’s Law
Level, the Travellers are investigated or challenged by
agents of planetary law enforcement.
Situation DM Response
First approach to a planet +0 Check
Offworlders wandering the
streets of a city (once per day)

+0 Check

Offworlders acting
suspiciously

-1 Check
Bar fight -1 Apprehended
Shots fired -2 Apprehended
Breaking and entering -2 Investigate
Firefight involving armoured
Travellers and military
weapons

-4 Apprehended

Murder and carnage -4 Investigate
Check: This result means the Travellers’ travel
documents and identities are checked, either by a
police officer or guard, or electronically by querying the
Travellers’ comms. A successful Admin or Streetwise
check can allay suspicion but if it is failed, the planetary
authorities move on to Investigation.
Investigate: This results in a detective or bureaucrat
probing deeper into the Travellers’ backgrounds. If the
Travellers have a ship, it will be searched. They may
be followed or have their communications tapped. They
may also be questioned closely.
Apprehended: The police show up ready for a fight.
Their response will generally be proportional to the threat
posed by the Travellers; if the Travellers are just making
trouble in a bar, then most police forces will use batons,
stunners, tranq gas and other non-lethal weapons. On
the other hand, if the Travellers are in battle dress and
firing PGHPs at the palace of the planetary duke, then
the police will show up with the best weapons and armour
available at the planet’s Tech Level (or even a few levels
higher), possibly with the army not far behind them.
Travellers arrested for a crime will face punishment,
determined by rolling 2D+DMs on the Sentencing table.
For crimes involving smuggling banned goods, the DM
is equal to the difference between the planet’s Law
Level and the banned goods in question (for example,
laser weapons are banned at Law Level 2, so a
Traveller found with a laser weapon on a Law Level 6
world would have DM+4 on the Sentencing table).

Other crimes have a set DM.
Crime DM
False Identity Law Level -5
Destruction of Property Law Level -3
Assault Law Level -2
Manslaughter Law Level -1
Murder Law Level +0
A Traveller with the Advocate skill may attempt to
reduce the severity of sentencing by making a check. If
successful, reduce the Sentencing DM by the Effect of
the check.
Sentencing
2D+DM Sentence
0 or less Dismissed or trivial
1–2 Fine of 1D x Cr1000 (per ton of
contraband)
3–4 Fine of 2D x Cr5000 (per ton of
contraband)
5–6 Exile or a fine of 2D x Cr10000 (per ton
of contraband)
7–8 Imprisonment for 1D months or exile
or fine of 2D x Cr20000 (per ton of
contraband)
9–10 Imprisonment for 1D years or exile
11–12 Imprisonment for 2D years or exile
13–14 Life imprisonment
15 or more Death
A result of Exile means the Traveller must leave the
planet immediately and never return.

STARPORT
Starports are the arteries of interstellar commerce.
These ports for spacefaring craft range in size from
a landing field with a rudimentary radio beacon and
hydrogen fuel still, to city-sized edifices where tens of
thousands of ships land daily. Many planets have only
a downport, a landing zone on the ground accessible
only by entering the atmosphere. Ships that cannot land
at a downport are serviced by a fleet of shuttles and
other smaller vessels. Worlds advanced or rich enough
may possess a highport, an orbiting starport. Some
are equipped with space elevators or even gravitic lifts
connecting highport to downport.
Starports are classed from A to E. To determine the
level of a starport on a planet, roll 2D and apply these
DMs to the Starport Class table:
DM+1 if the planet’s Population is 8–9
DM+2 if the planet’s Population is 10+
DM–1 if the planet’s Population is 3–4
DM–2 if the planet’s Population is 2–
Starport Class
2D+DM Starport Class
2 or less X
3 E
4 E
5 D
6 D
7 C
8 C
9 B
10 B
11+ A

Starport Facilities
Class Quality Berthing Cost Fuel Facilities Bases
A Excellent 1D x Cr1000 Refined Shipyard (all)
Repair
Highport 6+

Military 8+
Naval 8+
Scout 10+

B Good 1D x Cr500 Refined Shipyard (spacecraft)
Repair
Highport 8+

Military 8+
Naval 8+
Scout 9+

C Routine 1D x Cr100 Unrefined Shipyard (small craft)
Repair
Highport 10+

Military 10+
Scout 9+

D Poor 1D x Cr10 Unrefined Limited Repair
Highport 12+

Scout 8+
Corsair 12+
E Frontier 0 None None Corsair 10+
X No Starport 0 None None Corsair 10+

Quality: This determines both the condition of the port
itself and the level of competence of the staff. Quality
may vary – it is possible to find a Class D port run by
expert engineers or a Class A that has succumbed
to decay. Some worlds have entirely inappropriate
starports; a world that was once a centre of commerce
but has now been bypassed by new trade routes, might
have a cavernous port capable of handling thousands
of freighters now almost abandoned.
A frontier installation is just a bare spot of bedrock,
marked with a beacon, and is a starport in the most
technical sense only.
Berthing Cost: This is the price paid by any ship that
wants to land or dock at the starport and is due weekly.
Prices can vary wildly between starports but tend to
remain stable at each (roll once for each starport and
record it for future reference).
Fuel: This refers to the fuel available for purchase –
either refined or unrefined. Refined fuel costs Cr500 per
ton; unrefined fuel costs Cr100 per ton but is risky to
use when jumping. Bases have their own fuel-refining
ability – see Bases on page 259.
Facilities: These are the starport’s repair and
construction ability. A shipyard allows for the construction
of new vessels. A shipyard capable of building all types
of ships can construct small craft (less than 100 tons),
spacecraft (100 to 5,000 tons) and capital ships (more
than 5,000 tons). However only a Class A starport can
construct jump-capable spacecraft.
Repair facilities allow a damaged ship to be repaired and
have plenty of spare parts for most common systems.
Limited repair facilities can only fix Hull damage.
Use the following modifiers when determining whether
a highport is present: DM+1 if TL9–11, DM+2 if TL 12+,
DM+1 if Population 9+, DM–1 if Population 6–
Use the following modifiers when determining whether
a corsair base is present: DM+2 if Law Level 0, DM–2 if
Law Level 2+.
Bases: This lists what sort of bases may be present.
Roll 2D for each base type listed; for more details, see
Bases on page 259.

CHARTED SPACE: STARPORTS AND THE LAW
Technically, a starport is Imperial territory
and not under the jurisdiction of the planetary
government. The local government may share in
the construction costs, running costs and profits
of the starport but the port is extraterritorial and
run by an Imperium-appointed governor. This
means that Travellers can carry locally illegal
goods onto a planet so long as they do not leave
the starport. It also means that criminals and
refugees often claim sanctuary in a starport and
that a starport’s Tech Level may be considerably
higher than that of the rest of the planet.
Starports operate according to Imperial Law
(equivalent to Law Level 1 for most items and
forbidding all use of psionics).
However, Travellers should be aware that not
every world honours this approach and paranoid
governments have been known to forcibly board
and inspect ships to root out what they see as
unpleasant influences.

TECH LEVEL
The Tech Level of the planet is determined by rolling 1D
and adding DMs from the Tech Level table.
The Tech Level measures the average technology
presence on the planet and gives an idea of local
production and repair capability. Trade with offworlders
may bring in advanced technology; on average, a rich
individual can afford technology two or more levels
higher than the planetary average. The government
may also have access to higher-technology items.
A planet’s technology may be one or more levels
higher or lower in a particular field, such as Medicine,
Communications, Weaponry, Ship Construction, Power
Generation, Computers and so forth.
COMMUNICATIONS
If the planet is below Tech Level 3, then there will be
no telecommunication system whatsoever except for
whatever facilities the starport offers. If it is between
TL4 and TL6, then it has radio and telephone
communications between major cities at least but no satellite facilities. From TL7 onwards, the planet
has a progressively more advanced communications
grid. At TL9, it is accessible from every point of the
surface (communications satellites become cheap
and easy to deploy).

Tech Level
Score Starport Size Atmosphere Hydrographics Population Government
0 +2 +1 +1 +1
1 +2 +1 +1
2 +1 +1 +1
3 +1 +1 +1
4 +1 +1
5 +1 +1
6
7 +2
8 +1
9 +1 +2
10 (A) +6 +1 +2 +4
11 (B) +4 +1
12 (C) +2 +1
13 (D) +1 –2
14 (E) +1 –2
15 (F) +1
X -4

ENVIRONMENTAL LIMITS
Certain Atmospheres require a minimal Tech Level.
A world can have a Tech Level lower than this limit
but the population cannot maintain or repair their life
support systems and are likely doomed.
Tech Level and Environment
Atmosphere Minimum Tech Level
0 or 1 8
2 or 3 5
4, 7 or 9 3
10 (A) 8
11 (B) 9
12 (C) 10
13 or 14 (D or E) 5
15 (F) 8

BASES
In addition to the basic facilities at a starport, there may
be one or more special bases at the starport or nearby
in the system. These are the common types of bases
but others are also possible, such as prison facilities,
naval shipyards, alien embassies or consulates and
other secret operations. Some are specific to the
Charted Space universe but their equivalents could be
found almost anywhere.
Corsair Base (C): Popularised by Vargr, corsair bases
do not have the full range of facilities as naval bases
but provide enough to refuel and maintain corsair ships.
A corsair base is often the main staging point from
which raids are conducted.
Depot (D): Used by the Imperium’s sector fleets, a
depot is a massive naval base, often consuming an
entire star system. It can support a sizeable fraction
of a sector fleet’s ships at once, offering building,
repairing, rearming and experimental facilities. As well
as servicing ships, depots also have command and
control facilities, academies and mothballed ships.
Military Base (M): These are planetary facilities for
the support, maintenance, repair and refit of ground
vehicles and troops.
Naval (N): A naval base is a supply depot, refuelling
station, repair yard or fortress of either the Imperial Navy
or the local sector navy. Naval vessels can obtain refined
fuel and supplies here. Naval bases are always guarded
by armed vessels and fixed defence. Ex-Naval Travellers
may meet Contacts or Allies here and mercenary
Travellers can try to pick up work. Naval bases also have
an advanced hospital, although it is normally available
only to naval personnel. Travellers may also be able to
purchase navy-surplus weapons here.

Scout (S): A scout base offers refined fuel and supplies
to scout ships (including retired scout ships obtained by
retired scouts). They are also an excellent place to pick
up rumours and news.
Way Station (W): A large Imperial Interstellar
Scout Service installation dedicated to the x-boat
communication network and servicing scout ships.
TRAVEL CODES
There are two travel codes in the Charted Space
universe – Amber and Red – although other universes
may have equivalent classifications. An Amber world
has been deemed dangerous by the Imperium and
Travellers are warned to be on their guard. Amber
worlds are often undergoing upheaval or revolution, or
else are naturally hazardous environments.
Red worlds are interdicted and travel to them is
forbidden. A world might be Red because the Imperium
wishes to preserve it or because the world is too
dangerous to allow visitors. Interdictions are enforced
by the Imperial Navy.
A world with Atmosphere 10+, a Government 0, 7 or
10 and Law Level 0 or 9+ should be considered for
Amber status. Red codes are applied at the discretion
of the referee.

Trade Codes
Classification Code Planet Size Atmosphere Hydro Population Government Law Level Tech Level
Agricultural Ag 4–9 4–8 5–7
Asteroid As 0 0 0
Barren Ba 0 0 0
Desert De 2–9 0
Fluid Oceans Fl 10+ 1+
Garden Ga 6–8 5,6,8 5–7
High Population Hi 9+
High Tech Ht 12+
Ice-Capped Ic 0–1 1+
Industrial In 0–2, 4, 7,
9–12

9+
Low Population Lo 1–3
Low Tech Lt 1+ 5–
Non-Agricultural Na 0–3 0–3 6+
Non-Industrial Ni 4–6
Poor Po 2–5 0–3
Rich Ri 6,8 6–8 4–9
Vacuum Va 0
Waterworld Wa 3–9, 13+ 10+

TRADE CODES
Trade codes designate particular types of worlds and
the types of goods likely to be found there. If a world
meets all requirements listed for one or more Trade
codes, it gains those classifications. Trade codes are
used extensively in the Trade chapter.
Agricultural (Ag): Dedicated to farming and food
production. Often, they are divided into vast semi-
feudal estates.
Asteroids (As): Usually mining colonies but can also
be orbital factories or colonies.
Barren (Ba): Uncolonised and empty.
Desert (De): Dry and barely habitable.
Fluid Oceans (Fl): Worlds where the surface liquid is
something other than water and so are incompatible
with Earth-derived life.
Garden (Ga): Worlds that are Earth-like.
High Population (Hi): A population in the billions.
High Tech (Ht): Among the most technologically
advanced in Charted Space.
Ice-Capped (Ic): Worlds that have most of their surface
liquid frozen in polar ice caps and are cold and dry.
Industrial (In): Dominated by factories and cities.
Low Population (Lo): A population of only a few
thousand or less.
Low Tech (Lt): Pre-industrial and cannot produce
advanced goods.
Non-Agricultural (Na): Too dry or barren to support
their populations using conventional food production.
Non-Industrial (Ni): Too low in population to maintain
an extensive industrial base.
Poor (Po): Lacking resources, viable land or sufficient
population to be anything other than marginal colonies.
Rich (Ri): Blessed with a stable government and viable
biosphere, making them economic powerhouses.
Vacuum (Va): No atmosphere.
Water World (Wa): Almost entirely water-ocean across
their surface.